\documentclass[]{article}
\usepackage{lmodern}
\usepackage{amssymb,amsmath}
\usepackage{ifxetex,ifluatex}
\usepackage{fixltx2e} % provides \textsubscript
\ifnum 0\ifxetex 1\fi\ifluatex 1\fi=0 % if pdftex
  \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
  \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
\else % if luatex or xelatex
  \ifxetex
    \usepackage{mathspec}
  \else
    \usepackage{fontspec}
  \fi
  \defaultfontfeatures{Ligatures=TeX,Scale=MatchLowercase}
\fi
% use upquote if available, for straight quotes in verbatim environments
\IfFileExists{upquote.sty}{\usepackage{upquote}}{}
% use microtype if available
\IfFileExists{microtype.sty}{%
\usepackage{microtype}
\UseMicrotypeSet[protrusion]{basicmath} % disable protrusion for tt fonts
}{}
\usepackage[margin=1in]{geometry}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\hypersetup{unicode=true,
            pdftitle={Quantifying the Risk and Cost of Active Monitoring for Infectious Diseases},
            pdfauthor={Nicholas G Reich\^{}\{*,1\}, Justin Lessler\^{}\{2\}, Jay K Varma\^{}\{3,4\}, Neil M Vora\^{}\{3,4\}},
            pdfborder={0 0 0},
            breaklinks=true}
\urlstyle{same}  % don't use monospace font for urls
\usepackage{longtable,booktabs}
\usepackage{graphicx,grffile}
\makeatletter
\def\maxwidth{\ifdim\Gin@nat@width>\linewidth\linewidth\else\Gin@nat@width\fi}
\def\maxheight{\ifdim\Gin@nat@height>\textheight\textheight\else\Gin@nat@height\fi}
\makeatother
% Scale images if necessary, so that they will not overflow the page
% margins by default, and it is still possible to overwrite the defaults
% using explicit options in \includegraphics[width, height, ...]{}
\setkeys{Gin}{width=\maxwidth,height=\maxheight,keepaspectratio}
\IfFileExists{parskip.sty}{%
\usepackage{parskip}
}{% else
\setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
\setlength{\parskip}{6pt plus 2pt minus 1pt}
}
\setlength{\emergencystretch}{3em}  % prevent overfull lines
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}
\setcounter{secnumdepth}{0}
% Redefines (sub)paragraphs to behave more like sections
\ifx\paragraph\undefined\else
\let\oldparagraph\paragraph
\renewcommand{\paragraph}[1]{\oldparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi
\ifx\subparagraph\undefined\else
\let\oldsubparagraph\subparagraph
\renewcommand{\subparagraph}[1]{\oldsubparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi

%%% Use protect on footnotes to avoid problems with footnotes in titles
\let\rmarkdownfootnote\footnote%
\def\footnote{\protect\rmarkdownfootnote}

%%% Change title format to be more compact
\usepackage{titling}

% Create subtitle command for use in maketitle
\newcommand{\subtitle}[1]{
  \posttitle{
    \begin{center}\large#1\end{center}
    }
}

\setlength{\droptitle}{-2em}
  \title{Quantifying the Risk and Cost of Active Monitoring for Infectious
Diseases}
  \pretitle{\vspace{\droptitle}\centering\huge}
  \posttitle{\par}
  \author{Nicholas G Reich\(^{*,1}\), Justin Lessler\(^{2}\), Jay K
Varma\(^{3,4}\), Neil M Vora\(^{3,4}\)}
  \preauthor{\centering\large\emph}
  \postauthor{\par}
  \predate{\centering\large\emph}
  \postdate{\par}
  \date{November 2017}

\usepackage{setspace}\doublespacing

\begin{document}
\maketitle

~

\paragraph{Author Affiliations}\label{author-affiliations}

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts, USA
\item
  Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland,
  USA
\item
  New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, USA
\item
  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA
\end{enumerate}

*Correspondence to
\href{mailto:nick@schoolph.umass.edu}{\nolinkurl{nick@schoolph.umass.edu}}

~

During outbreaks of deadly emerging pathogens (e.g., Ebola, MERS-CoV)
and bioterror threats (e.g., smallpox), actively monitoring potentially
infected individuals aims to limit disease transmission and morbidity.
Guidance issued by CDC on active monitoring was a cornerstone of its
response to the West Africa Ebola outbreak. There are limited data on
how to balance the costs and performance of this important public health
activity. We present a framework that estimates the risks and costs of
specific durations of active monitoring for pathogens of significant
public health concern. We analyze data from New York City's Ebola active
monitoring program over a 16-month period in 2014-2016. For monitored
individuals, we identified unique durations of active monitoring that
minimize expected costs for those at ``low (but not zero) risk'' and
``some or high risk'': 21 and 31 days, respectively. Extending our
analysis to smallpox and MERS-CoV, we found that the optimal length of
active monitoring relative to the median incubation period was reduced
compared to Ebola due to less variable incubation periods. Active
monitoring can save lives but is expensive. Resources can be most
effectively allocated by using exposure-risk categories to modify the
duration or intensity of active monitoring.

\section{Introduction}\label{introduction}

The outbreak of Ebola virus disease (Ebola) in west Africa was the
largest outbreak of a highly virulent acute infection in modern times,
leading the global health community to reassess the ability of highly
pathogenic acute infections to spread widely in today's interconnected
world. To improve rapid identification and evaluation of individuals
infected with Ebola, on October 27, 2014, the U.S. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) recommended active monitoring of
individuals potentially exposed to Ebola virus. Individuals under active
monitoring were asked to contact local health authorities to report
their health status every day for 21 days after their last potential
exposure.

Thousands of individuals were monitored for Ebola in the United States
between October 2014 and February 2016, including over 10,000
individuals during one five month period.\textsuperscript{1} CDC's
guidance on active monitoring was a cornerstone of its response to
Ebola. The guidance balanced numerous stakeholder concerns, including
mitigating risk to communities and travelers without unnecessarily
restricting individual liberties. Recommendations for active monitoring
were discontinued in February 2016.\textsuperscript{2} Over 20\% of all
individuals actively monitored for Ebola in the United States were
monitored in New York City (NYC), more than any other
jurisdiction.\textsuperscript{1}

Active monitoring may help prevent and contain outbreaks of rapidly
spreading emerging pathogens that pose a grave threat to public health.
Such outbreaks may occur naturally, via a bioterrorist attack, or via
unintended release from a laboratory. The decision to implement active
monitoring, or another non-pharmaceutical intervention, depends on an
assessment of the risk posed by a pathogen and the ability of the chosen
intervention to reduce that risk.\textsuperscript{3} Key considerations
include the transmissibility and pathogenicity of the pathogen, the
potential size of an outbreak, and the relationship between the time of
symptom onset and infectiousness.\textsuperscript{4} Ebola, Middle East
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV), and smallpox are examples
of viral illnesses for which active monitoring could play a pivotal role
in preventing a large-scale outbreak.\textsuperscript{5}

Active monitoring programs must balance conflicting priorities. The
central goals of these programs are to identify, isolate, and treat
infected individuals quickly. Setting an active monitoring period many
times longer than any known incubation period of the pathogen of
interest could virtually guarantee that all infected individuals would
exhibit symptoms while being monitored. However, such a program would be
unreasonably expensive, inconvenience monitored individuals, and incur
many financial and social costs through frequent responses to false
positive cases. Evidence-based monitoring periods and appropriate
tailoring of the monitoring intensity to disease risk should therefore
be used to balance costs with biosecurity risks.

Here we present an empirical framework for evaluating the risks and
costs associated with active monitoring (implemented in an online tool
available at
\url{http://iddynamics.jhsph.edu/apps/shiny/activemonitr/}). We apply
this framework to Ebola, MERS-CoV, and smallpox using data on the
natural history of these diseases and data from the Ebola response of
the NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DOHMH).

\section{Methods}\label{methods}

\subsubsection{Estimating the incubation period
distribution}\label{estimating-the-incubation-period-distribution}

The incubation period of a disease is the duration of time between
exposure to the pathogen and symptom onset.\textsuperscript{6} This
characteristic is imperfectly observed in most
settings.\textsuperscript{7,8} We obtained previously published
incubation period observations on 145 cases of Ebola in
Guinea\textsuperscript{9}, 170 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV in
South Korea\textsuperscript{10} and 362 cases of
smallpox\textsuperscript{11--13}. We fit parametric distributions to the
observed incubation period data using maximum likelihood techniques (see
Supplemental Text). We ran sensitivity analyses to evaluate the
influence of several outlying observations in the Ebola dataset.

\subsubsection{A model for active monitoring
outcomes}\label{a-model-for-active-monitoring-outcomes}

We developed a probabilistic model that uses varying probabilities to
alter the incubation period, thus estimating whether active monitoring
would identify an individual infected with the pathogen of interest.
Figure 1 presents the model schema, which involves a monitored
individual having one of four outcomes:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  no symptoms warranting clinical follow-up,
\item
  no symptomatic infection with the disease of interest, but occurrence
  of symptoms that necessitate ruling out of the disease of interest,
\item
  symptomatic infection with the disease of interest occurring during
  the individual's period of active monitoring, and
\item
  symptomatic infection with the disease of interest occurring outside
  the individual's period of active monitoring.
\end{enumerate}

Scenario 4 represents the highest risk of secondary transmission and may
also reduce the chance of a positive clinical outcome for the sick
individual.

We use a population-level probabilistic model with five key parameters.
For a given set of parameters, the model calculates the expected number
of individuals in a particular population or cohort of a fixed size that
experience each of the four outcomes listed above. Each outcome has a
specific cost and model-based probability associated with it (see
Supplement and Figure 1 for details). These calculations are repeated
for a set of stochastic samples of possible parameter values
(e.g.~samples from the posterior distribution of incubation period
parameters) to provide measures of uncertainty. Formal statements of the
equations underlying the model are available in the Supplement.

Since limited data prevent us from formally estimating variance, we
created conservative (i.e.~maximally wide) intervals for possible costs
by using the endpoints of the plausible cost ranges. Additionally, it
determines the uncertainty associated with these estimates due to not
having precise incubation period observations and having an unknown time
between exposure and the beginning of monitoring for a particular
individual (see Supplemental Text). For these pathogens, we assume that
infectiousness coincides with the onset of
symptoms.\textsuperscript{14--16}

Our model estimates the risks and costs associated with active
monitoring programs for a range of active monitoring durations. To
estimate the cost per person-day of monitoring, we used data on the
number of individuals actively monitored by DOHMH and costs associated
with the DOHMH Ebola response. Additionally, for the purposes of
hypothetical cost calculations, we assumed that an individual who
becomes symptomatic with the disease of interest while under active
monitoring gives rise to no secondary infections, while an individual
who develops symptoms after his/her active monitoring period ends could
give rise to as many as 4 new Ebola infections (an upper estimate based
on prior research\textsuperscript{17,18}).

\subsubsection{Stratifying by exposure
risk}\label{stratifying-by-exposure-risk}

Classifying individuals based on prior exposure risks enables targeted
strategies in a range of public health response settings, including
active monitoring. For example, in response to the West Africa Ebola
outbreak, CDC issued recommendations on risk stratification of
individuals for a potential Ebola virus exposure (``high risk'', ``some
risk'', ``low (but not zero) risk'', ``no identifiable risk'') and for
how long and how intensively individuals in each of these categories
should be monitored.\textsuperscript{19} DOHMH's active monitoring
program, described previously\textsuperscript{20}, was implemented
consistent with CDC recommendations. However, creating, evaluating, and
modifying such classifications in practice is a difficult task and
requires situational awareness and data that would vary depending on the
pathogen and outbreak setting.

For the CDC Ebola risk strata, we estimated probabilities of a monitored
individual developing Ebola. These estimates were based on extrapolated
numbers of actively monitored individuals in the United States during
2014-2016\textsuperscript{1} and public data on the four domestic cases
of Ebola\textsuperscript{21} (Supplemental Text, Table 2).

\subsubsection{Data Availability}\label{data-availability}

We developed open-source software, including a freely-available web
application at
\url{http://iddynamics.jhsph.edu/apps/shiny/activemonitr/}. The source
code for the web app, the data for the analyses, and the code to
reproduce this manuscript itself are all freely available online under
an open-source license at GitHub
(\url{https://github.com/reichlab/activemonitr}), with a static version
in an open-access digital library\textsuperscript{22}. All analyses were
run in R version 3.4.1 (2017-06-30).\textsuperscript{23} These tools
enable others to easily implement our model and reproduce our results.

\section{Results}\label{results}

\subsubsection{Incubation period
estimates}\label{incubation-period-estimates}

Estimates and credible regions for incubation period distribution
parameters for Ebola, MERS-CoV, and smallpox are shown in Figure 2.
Consistent with other studies that used the same
data,\textsuperscript{9,10,13} we estimated that half of all cases of
Ebola will have an incubation period of less than 8.9 days (95\% CI:
8.0-9.8), of MERS-CoV less than 6.9 days (95\% CI: 6.3-7.5) and of
smallpox less than 12.2 days (95\% CI: 12.0-12.4). Additionally, the
data suggest that 95\% of cases of Ebola will have an incubation period
of less than 20.3 days (95\% CI: 18.1-23.0), of MERS-CoV 13.3 days (95\%
CI: 12.0-14.8), and of smallpox 15.8 days (95\% CI: 15.4-16.2).

We estimated smallpox to have the longest median incubation period of
the three pathogens considered, although its distribution also showed
the least overall variance. We estimate that MERS-CoV incubation periods
are the shortest of the three, with the upper limit of the 95th
percentile being just above 15 days (Figure 2).

\subsubsection{Modeling the risk of symptomatic
illness}\label{modeling-the-risk-of-symptomatic-illness}

Using information on cases of Ebola diagnosed in the U.S., as well as
extrapolated case information, we estimated the probability of a
``some-risk'' or ``high-risk'' individual developing a symptomatic
infection with Ebola as 1 in 1,000. For ``low (but not zero) risk''
individuals, we estimated this risk to be 1 in 10,000 (Supplemental
Text, Table 2).

Incorporating these probabilities into our model, for each pathogen we
calculated the probability of symptomatic illness developing in an
individual after they were no longer being actively monitored. To
standardize the results across diseases, we present the risk estimates
across a range of different active monitoring period durations, shown as
multiples of the median incubation period for each disease (Figure 3).

The model showed that an increase in the duration of the active
monitoring period is associated with a decline in the probability that
an individual develops symptoms due to the disease of interest after the
active monitoring period ends. The rate at which that risk declines
depends on the estimated variability of the incubation period
distribution. Since the estimated incubation period distribution for
Ebola showed the highest variability, the probability of symptoms
occurring after active monitoring ends decreased more slowly when
compared with the other pathogens. This feature also impacts the
sensitivity of estimating the optimal duration of active monitoring when
the probabilities of developing symptomatic infection are mis-specified
(Supplemental Text, Table 4).

During the West Africa Ebola outbreak, CDC recommended active monitoring
for 21 days. This corresponds to about 2.4 times the median incubation
period for Ebola (vertical dashed line, Figure 3). To achieve the same
level of absolute risk for either MERS-CoV or smallpox, our model
suggests that a duration of active monitoring would need to be set at
less than two times the median incubation period for both of these
diseases.

\subsubsection{Minimizing costs of active monitoring programs: Ebola
case
study}\label{minimizing-costs-of-active-monitoring-programs-ebola-case-study}

The total expense for Ebola response by DOHMH during the period from
July 31, 2014--November 7, 2015 was \$9.7 million. Of this, \$4.3
million was in response to a single Ebola case\textsuperscript{24} and
\$1.9 million was for active monitoring. The remaining balance of \$3.5
million was used for other Ebola preparedness activities. DOHMH
monitored 5,379 non-unique individuals during this period (active
monitoring began in NYC on October 25, 2014). We used these data to
estimate that the cost of monitoring per person-day in NYC was
\$10--\$20.

The number of serious infection events occurring in actively monitored
individuals in NYC was small. None of the monitored individuals
developed Ebola. The single Ebola case diagnosed in NYC occurred before
active monitoring was implemented. We assumed that a small fraction of
monitored individuals, 30 (or 0.6\%), developed symptoms within the 21
day monitoring period that were serious enough to necessitate
hospitalization at an institution in NYC to rule-out Ebola. At one
hospital, Bellevue, it cost between \$10,000--\$30,000 per
hospitalization to rule out Ebola in symptomatic, actively monitored
individuals (John Maher, NYC Health and Hospitals, personal
communication). This does not include the substantial infrastructural
costs of creating and maintaining a special pathogens unit at the
hospital.

Our model provides ranges of expected cost for active monitoring
systems. It identifies an optimal duration of active monitoring, by
finding the expected cost range with the lowest maximum value. We
applied the model to the case-study of Ebola in NYC, based on data from
DOHMH (Table 1, Figure 4). Expected costs of short periods of active
monitoring (left hand side of Figure 4) are driven by the cost of a
missed case and the number of expected additional secondary cases, while
the rate of decline with additional days of monitoring is driven by the
shape of the incubation period distribution. The costs of longer periods
of active monitoring are driven by the per day cost of monitoring and
costs of false positive detections (right hand side of Figure 4).

The ``best case scenario'', from a public health and expected cost
standpoint, can be seen as the lower limit of the shaded cost ranges in
Figure 4. In this scenario, none of the monitored individuals is
infected. Therefore, the expected costs are simply determined by the
costs of the monitoring and attending to false alarms. This cost rises
steadily as the duration of monitoring increases.

However, in scenarios when a monitored individual does develop
symptomatic illness, the expected cost curve does achieve a minimum
value at a specific duration of active monitoring. For the low-risk
individuals, the model suggests that the upper limit of the cost range
is minimized with 21.3 days of monitoring (i.e., 2.4 median incubation
periods, 95\% CI = 19.5 - 22.2). For the some- or high-risk individuals,
the model suggests that the cost is minimized with 31.1 days of
monitoring (i.e., 3.5 median incubation periods, 95\% CI = 27.5 - 33.8)
(Figure 4). The model results are sensitive to the assumed cost per day
of monitoring and the number of secondary cases. For example, if the
upper limit of the cost increases from \$20 to \$40/day or the number of
secondary cases decreases from 4 to 2, the durations of monitoring that
would minimize expected cost decrease by 2-3 days for each scenario.

The wide ranges of expected cost are largely driven by the uncertainty
in the number of secondary cases that may result from a single infection
missed by active monitoring. The upper limit in Figure 4 assumes that 4
secondary cases occur, which is a possible, but unlikely, scenario. The
uncertainty in these estimates could be driven down by making more
specific assumptions about each of the model input parameters. For
example, if we assume that a case gives rise to only one secondary
infection, that the cost is a fixed \$4 million per case, and that the
cost per monitored-person day is \$20, the upper limit of expected costs
is lower compared with the scenario shown in Figure 4 (see Supplemental
Figure 1). Specifically, for the some- or high-risk individuals, the new
model suggests that the upper limit of the expected cost range achieves
its minimum at a level that is \$113376 less than the scenario presented
in Figure 4. However, we also caution against relying too strongly on
single analyses like these that are based on strong assumptions. While
they characterize individual possible scenarios clearly, they also
understate the true uncertainty associated with the estimates.

\section{Discussion}\label{discussion}

For three pathogens of significant public health concern, we quantified
the risk, costs, and attendant uncertainty associated with specific
durations of active monitoring. The approach presented can be used to
develop empirically based public health policies in future outbreaks.

Perception of risk is a key component of decision making, but ultimately
science should inform public health policies. A key challenge faced by
decision makers is that the public's perception of risk is often
determined by the consequences of the event even if the probability of
the event occurring is rare. With severe diseases, the consequences may
be perceived as so dire that the public's tolerance for risk will be
very low. While no policy can guarantee zero risk, analyses such as
those presented here can assist in determining appropriate thresholds
that reduce risk below a level tolerable for a risk-averse population.

In some settings, active monitoring could serve as an alternative to
quarantine, which involves both monitoring and severe restrictions on
movement. In countries at low risk for Ebola, quarantine raised many
ethical issues during the West Africa Ebola
outbreak.\textsuperscript{25} CDC's Ebola active monitoring
recommendations were therefore a critical cornerstone of the public
health response in the United States that strived to balance the
concerns from a diverse set of stakeholders without unnecessarily
restricting individual liberties.\textsuperscript{2} Active monitoring
has since been applied by DOHMH for an individual at risk for another
acute viral illness, Lassa fever. However, for diseases in which
asymptomatic persons may transmit infection --such as influenza or
measles-- detection of the cases based on active monitoring of
symptomology might not be soon enough to prevent secondary transmission.
As such, for these diseases, quarantine might be a more appropriate
public health measure.

Our model suggests durations of active monitoring for emerging pathogens
early in an outbreak. Accurate estimates of the median incubation period
can be made even when few data are available.\textsuperscript{7} While
accurately estimating the variability of the incubation period requires
more data\textsuperscript{26}, existing data on the variation observed
in similar pathogens could be used to inform early estimates until
better data become available. When estimating incubation periods in
real-time, care must be taken to adjust for possible truncation of
longer incubation periods\textsuperscript{27,28} or selection biases
that could favor reporting of shorter incubation
periods\textsuperscript{10}.

While our model explicitly propagates uncertainty in the incubation
period distribution, public health practitioners will usually have too
little data to estimate uncertainty for other model parameters. To help
account for this limitation, we ran the model for plausible ranges of
other parameters, presenting a range of possible costs and risks.
Sensitivity to these and other assumptions can be assessed through the
open-access web applet that implements the model.

Evaluating the cost of monitoring programs is a challenging,
multi-faceted problem. While we present new data from New York City's
active monitoring program showing that the per-individual cost of
monitoring is ``low'' (about \$10--\$20 per day), the total program cost
can be substantial. Limiting who needs to be monitored and the duration
of monitoring could provide valuable savings.

We present a framework for assessing the cost of active monitoring,
which is one possible public health strategy for combating an emerging
epidemic. However, alternate strategies such as quarantine,
pharmaceutical interventions, or increasing risk communication could
also be implemented. These different interventions could also be
assessed under a similar framework to that presented here. We hope this
paper provides the key underpinnings needed for a formal
cost-effectiveness analysis. Such an analysis, that synthesizes
model-based estimates of costs, benefits, and risks, could provide
additional valuable information about the value of each possible
strategy.

Some cost-efficiency may be achieved through targeted strategies. As CDC
recommended for Ebola, it may be appropriate to use exposure-risk
categories to modify the duration or intensity of active monitoring.
Additionally, stronger public health messaging could encourage travelers
to take necessary health precautions to avoid common travel-associated
illnesses, e.g.~malaria.\textsuperscript{29} This, in turn, could reduce
unnecessary testing and costs associated with symptomatic events with
diseases other than the one of interest. Low-cost versions of active
monitoring have the potential to add value to public health response to
less severe outbreaks as well.

Accurately estimating the risk of developing disease within
exposure-risk categories poses a challenge to public health officials.
Our analyses show that the sensitivity to mis-specified risk varies by
pathogen. When the estimated cost varies across plausible risk levels,
the full range of potential costs and durations should be considered
until better data are available to obtain more precise estimates of the
risk. Additionally, since data on active monitoring programs and
imported infections are very rare, every effort should be taken to
validate future model estimates of risk and sensitivity analyses should
be consulted to mitigate the impact of biased estimates due to
inadequate data.

The framework presented is generally applicable, but given the lack of
empirical cost information for the response to and monitoring of
smallpox and MERS-CoV our analysis is strongly focused on Ebola. While
we have used some of the best available data on large-scale active
monitoring programs in our analyses, some potential costs and savings
were not factored in to these calculations. The estimates available from
DOHMH do not include the costs of cell phones given to monitored
individuals, the staff time incurred by CDC and US Department of
Homeland Security in screening travelers at airports, and the costs of
evaluating individuals with symptoms that were not due to Ebola. More
detailed cost data was not available from DOHMH, but such data could
help to disentangle the fixed costs associated with running an active
monitoring program from the cost per monitored individual. Additionally,
we only presented gross cost estimates for the evaluation of a
symptomatic individual under active monitoring from one NYC hospital,
which was not representative of all hospitals in NYC. Finally, local
considerations prompted DOHMH to opt for an active monitoring program
involving humans to make and receive active monitoring reports from
individuals. In contrast, other jurisdictions used digital systems to
administer monitoring reports.\textsuperscript{30} The merits of these
different approaches deserve further investigation.

Recent history has shown that the unexpected emergence of new disease
threats has become a recurring theme in global health and preparedness.
While active monitoring does not play a role in the response to every
emerging infectious disease (e.g., it has not played an important role
in the response to the Zika virus epidemic), it will likely be used
again in the response to future threats. Our framework provides valuable
information for assessing the cost-effectiveness of various active
monitoring strategies in response to critical disease outbreaks. By
providing an empirical basis for evaluating active monitoring programs,
these tools can strengthen biosecurity and optimize active monitoring
programs in response to future global disease threats.

\section{Acknowledgments}\label{acknowledgments}

We thank the individuals who underwent active monitoring in NYC, Ifeoma
Ezeoke for preparing the DOHMH active monitoring data and Margaret
Pletnikoff for preparing the DOHMH cost data. We thank Dr.~Simon
Cauchemez, Dr.~Ousmane Faye, and Dr.~Amadou Sall for providing access to
the Ebola incubation period data from Guinea and giving permission for
this data to be made publicly available. We also acknowledge John Maher
for providing details on costs of evaluating Ebola patients at Bellevue
Hospital in New York City.

NGR was funded by a grant from the MIDAS program of the National
Institutes of General Medical Sciences (R35GM119582). The findings and
conclusions in this article are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the official position of DOHMH, CDC, NIGMS, or the
National Institutes of Health.

\section{Author Contributions}\label{author-contributions}

NGR, JL, JKV, and NMV designed the study. NMV and JKV oversaw the active
monitoring data collection and provided data for the study on active
monitoring programs. NGR obtained incubation period data from existing
publications and via personal communication with other authors. NGR ran
the data analysis, prepared the figures, and drafted the manuscript. All
authors participated in writing and providing substantial feedback on
the manuscript.

\section{Competing Financial
Interests}\label{competing-financial-interests}

All authors claim no competing financial interests associated with this
work.

\section{Tables}\label{tables}

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}lllll@{}}
\caption{Total expected costs to the public health system (including
active monitoring and response) per 100 monitored individuals, at two
exposure-risk categories. Columns represent multiples of the median
incubation period of Ebola. Rows represent the CDC exposure-risk
category. Costs are inclusive of active monitoring and public health
response and are based on model outputs for Ebola. Values are in
\$'000s.}\tabularnewline
\toprule
& 1.5 & 2 & 3 & 5\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endfirsthead
\toprule
& 1.5 & 2 & 3 & 5\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
some risk and high risk & \$427-\$523 & \$436-\$475 & \$454-\$460 &
\$490-\$493\tabularnewline
low (but not zero) risk & \$67-\$77 & \$76-\$81 & \$94-\$96 &
\$130-\$133\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

\section{Figure captions}\label{figure-captions}

\textbf{Figure 1} Model schematic representing four outcome scenarios
for a person under active monitoring. Estimated costs shown are based on
published costs\textsuperscript{24} as well as new data from DOHMH and
Bellevue Hospital in NYC. Details on the model formulation are available
in Supplemental Table 3. Our model uses probabilities to calculate the
likelihood of each of the possible model outcomes. Additionally, we
estimate the probability that an individual who does not develop the
disease of interest develops symptomatic illness necessitating
hospitalization to rule-out the disease of interest. (See Supplemental
Text for details.)

~

\textbf{Figure 2} Estimates and credible regions for incubation period
distributions for Ebola, MERS-CoV and smallpox. The shaded elliptical
areas represent regions that contain 95\% of the estimated posterior
distributions for each of the three diseases. The disease-specific
curves plotted on the right show the estimated distribution for the
incubation period for each disease (dark line). To show some of the
uncertainty associated with these estimates, a random selection of
density functions sampled from the joint posterior are represented by
colored transparent lines around the heavy lines. Shaded vertical bands
indicate the marginal credible regions for the median and 95th
percentile.

~

\textbf{Figure 3} Estimated probabilities of symptoms occurring after
active monitoring (AM) ends across different active monitoring period
durations, shown as multiples of the median incubation period. Figures
are shown for `some or high risk' and `low (but not zero) risk'
scenarios, with probabilities of developing symptomatic infection set to
1/1,000 and 1/10,000, respectively. The vertical dashed line indicates
the 21 day duration recommended for Ebola active monitoring (i.e.,
approximately 2.4 times the median incubation period of Ebola).

\textbf{Figure 4} Estimated cost ranges of actively monitoring 100
individuals for Ebola, calculated separately for some or high risk
individuals and low (but not zero) risk individuals. The dashed lines
intersect at the minimum point for the upper limit of each cost range.

\section*{Bibliography}\label{bibliography}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{Bibliography}

\hypertarget{refs}{}
\hypertarget{ref-StehlingAriza:2015vd}{}
1. Stehling-Ariza, T. \emph{et al.} Monitoring of Persons with Risk for
Exposure to Ebola Virus Disease - United States, November 3, 2014-March
8, 2015. \emph{MMWR. Morbidity and mortality weekly report} \textbf{64,}
685--689 (2015).

\hypertarget{ref-CentersforDiseaseControlandPrevention:lyxYF_Hp}{}
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Interim U.S. guidance for
monitoring and movement of persons with potential Ebola virus exposure.

\hypertarget{ref-peak2017comparing}{}
3. Peak, C. M., Childs, L. M., Grad, Y. H. \& Buckee, C. O. Comparing
nonpharmaceutical interventions for containing emerging epidemics.
\emph{Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences} \textbf{114,}
4023--4028 (2017).

\hypertarget{ref-Fraser:2004ci}{}
4. Fraser, C., Riley, S., Anderson, R. M. \& Ferguson, N. M. Factors
that make an infectious disease outbreak controllable. \emph{Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America}
\textbf{101,} 6146--6151 (2004).

\hypertarget{ref-CentersforDiseaseControlandPrevention:2015tk}{}
5. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Middle East Respiratory
Syndrome: People at Increased Risk for MERS. (2015).

\hypertarget{ref-Brookmeyer:2005bc}{}
6. Brookmeyer, R. Incubation Period of Infectious Diseases. in
\emph{Encyclopedia of biostatistics} (John Wiley \& Sons, Ltd, 2005).

\hypertarget{ref-Reich:2009jq}{}
7. Reich, N. G., Lessler, J., Cummings, D. A. T. \& Brookmeyer, R.
Estimating incubation period distributions with coarse data.
\emph{Statistics in medicine} \textbf{28,} 2769--2784 (2009).

\hypertarget{ref-Lessler:2009ub}{}
8. Lessler, J. \emph{et al.} Incubation periods of acute respiratory
viral infections: a systematic review. \emph{The Lancet Infectious
Diseases} \textbf{9,} 291--300 (2009).

\hypertarget{ref-Faye:2015jc}{}
9. Faye, O. \emph{et al.} Chains of transmission and control of Ebola
virus disease in Conakry, Guinea, in 2014: an observational study.
\emph{The Lancet Infectious Diseases} \textbf{15,} 320--326 (2015).

\hypertarget{ref-Virlogeux:2016ty}{}
10. Virlogeux, V., Park, M., Wu, J. T. \& Cowling, B. J. Association
between Severity of MERS-CoV Infection and Incubation Period.
\emph{Emerging Infectious Diseases} \textbf{22,} (2016).

\hypertarget{ref-Litvinjenko:1972vp}{}
11. Litvinjenko, S., Arsic, B. \& Borjanovic, S. Epidemiologic Aspects
of Smallpox in Yugoslavia in 1972. \emph{Bulletin of the World Health
Organization} (1972).

\hypertarget{ref-Mack:1972jc}{}
12. Mack, T. M. Smallpox in Europe, 1950-1971. \emph{Journal of
Infectious Diseases} \textbf{125,} 161--169 (1972).

\hypertarget{ref-Nishiura:2009dh}{}
13. Nishiura, H. Determination of the appropriate quarantine period
following smallpox exposure: an objective approach using the incubation
period distribution. \emph{International journal of hygiene and
environmental health} \textbf{212,} 97--104 (2009).

\hypertarget{ref-Velasquez:2015gv}{}
14. Velásquez, G. E. \emph{et al.} Time from Infection to Disease and
Infectiousness for Ebola Virus Disease, a Systematic Review.
\emph{Clinical infectious diseases : an official publication of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America} \textbf{61,} 1135--1140 (2015).

\hypertarget{ref-Cowling:2015vb}{}
15. Cowling, B. J. \emph{et al.} Preliminary epidemiological assessment
of MERS-CoV outbreak in South Korea, May to June 2015. \emph{Euro
Surveillance} \textbf{20,} 7--13 (2015).

\hypertarget{ref-Fenner:1988ux}{}
16. Fenner, F., Henderson, D. A., Arita, I., Jezek, Z. \& Ladnyi, I. D.
\emph{Smallpox and its Eradication}. (World Health Organization, 1988).

\hypertarget{ref-Althaus:2014cw}{}
17. Althaus, C. L. Estimating the Reproduction Number of Ebola Virus
(EBOV) During the 2014 Outbreak in West Africa. \emph{PLoS currents}
\textbf{6,} (2014).

\hypertarget{ref-Chowell:2004gh}{}
18. Chowell, G., Hengartner, N. W., Castillo-Chavez, C., Fenimore, P. W.
\& Hyman, J. M. The basic reproductive number of Ebola and the effects
of public health measures: the cases of Congo and Uganda. \emph{Journal
of Theoretical Biology} \textbf{229,} 119--126 (2004).

\hypertarget{ref-CentersforDiseaseControlandPrevention:2015tc}{}
19. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Epidemiologic Risk
Factors to Consider when Evaluating a Person for Exposure to Ebola
Virus. (2015).

\hypertarget{ref-Millman:2016cz}{}
20. Millman, A. J. \emph{et al.} Active Monitoring of Travelers Arriving
from Ebola-Affected Countries - New York City, October 2014-April 2015.
\emph{MMWR. Morbidity and mortality weekly report} \textbf{65,} 51--54
(2016).

\hypertarget{ref-CentersforDiseaseControlandPrevention:VbDBWqNH}{}
21. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Cases of Ebola Diagnosed
in the United States \textbar{} Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever \textbar{} CDC.

\hypertarget{ref-Reich:2017z}{}
22. Reich, N. G. \& Li, X. reichlab/activemonitr: preprint.
\emph{Zenodo.} (2017).
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.260135}{10.5281/ZENODO.260135}

\hypertarget{ref-rcoreteam}{}
23. R Core Team. \emph{R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing}. (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, 2015).

\hypertarget{ref-Yacisin:2015wm}{}
24. Yacisin, K. \emph{et al.} Ebola virus disease in a humanitarian aid
worker - New York City, October 2014. \emph{MMWR. Morbidity and
mortality weekly report} \textbf{64,} 321--323 (2015).

\hypertarget{ref-Drazen:2014iz}{}
25. Drazen, J. M. \emph{et al.} Ebola and quarantine. \emph{The New
England journal of medicine} \textbf{371,} 2029--2030 (2014).

\hypertarget{ref-WorldHealthOrganization:QuWKXo2f}{}
26. World Health Organization. Consensus document on the epidemiology of
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). (2003).

\hypertarget{ref-Brookmeyer:2001gx}{}
27. Brookmeyer, R., Blades, N., Hugh-Jones, M. \& Henderson, D. A. The
statistical analysis of truncated data: application to the Sverdlovsk
anthrax outbreak. \emph{Biostatistics} \textbf{2,} 233--247 (2001).

\hypertarget{ref-Nishiura:2011dc}{}
28. Nishiura, H. \& Inaba, H. Estimation of the incubation period of
influenza A (H1N1-2009) among imported cases: addressing censoring using
outbreak data at the origin of importation. \emph{Journal of Theoretical
Biology} \textbf{272,} 123--130 (2011).

\hypertarget{ref-Ezeoke:2016jv}{}
29. Ezeoke, I. \emph{et al.} Health Precautions Taken by Travelers to
Countries with Ebola Virus Disease. \emph{Emerging Infectious Diseases}
\textbf{22,} 929--931 (2016).

\hypertarget{ref-Parham:2015wf}{}
30. Parham, M. \emph{et al.} Ebola active monitoring system for
travelers returning from West Africa---Georgia, 2014-2015. \emph{MMWR.
Morbidity and mortality weekly report} \textbf{64,} 347--350 (2015).


\end{document}
